# Weather Generator v2.0

## Welcome to the code repository of the weather regime based stochastic weather generator: WR-SWG, or for simplicity, WGEN! ##

The WGEN was first developed by [Prof. Scott Steinschneider](https://cals.cornell.edu/scott-steinschneider) (Cornell University) (see *Steinschneider et al., 2019*). 
Since then, it has been upgraded, applied to different locations, and used for varying purposes by [the Steinschneider Research Group]( https://blogs.cornell.edu/steinschneider/) and their collaborators.

The WGEN is designed to be a flexible tool that can facilitate computationally fast, internally consistent scenario generation to support climate vulnerability assessments of water systems in a way that is more easily connected to advances in climate science. 
It is well suited for risk-based simulation studies of system-of-systems that span large regions and multiple sectors (e.g., food, energy, and water).
The tool is useful in expediting the adoption of bottom-up vulnerability assessments across water, food, and energy sectors, by providing a regional set of scenarios that can be tailored for individual locations and analyses.

WGEN-v2.0 scripts are developed in the R Foundation for Statistical Computing Platform Desktop System Type x64-based PC with Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-9700 CPU 3.00 GHz 8 Cores 8 Logical Processors 64.0 GB RAM (64-bit) R version 4.2.0 (RStudio 2022-04-22 ucrt).

### How to cite

If you use the WGEN scripts (as a whole, or partially, and/or as a template for your research work), 
or its results/methods, please cite the references below.

1. Steinschneider, S., Ray, P., Rahat, S. H., & Kucharski, J. (2019). A weather‐regime‐based stochastic weather generator for climate vulnerability assessments of water systems in the western United States. *[Water Resources Research](https://doi.org/10.1029/2018WR024446)*, 55(8), 6923-6945.

```bibtex
@article{steinschneider2019weather,
  title={A weather-regime-based stochastic weather generator for climate vulnerability assessments of water systems in the western United States},
  author={Steinschneider, Scott and Ray, Patrick and Rahat, Saiful Haque and Kucharski, John},
  journal={Water Resources Research},
  volume={55},
  number={8},
  pages={6923--6945},
  year={2019},
  publisher={Wiley Online Library}
}
```

2. Najibi, N., Mukhopadhyay, S., & Steinschneider, S. (2021). Identifying weather regimes for regional‐scale stochastic weather generators. *[International Journal of Climatology](https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.6969)*, 41(4), 2456-2479.
```bibtex
@article{najibi2021identifying,
  title={Identifying weather regimes for regional-scale stochastic weather generators},
  author={Najibi, Nasser and Mukhopadhyay, Sudarshana and Steinschneider, Scott},
  journal={International Journal of Climatology},
  volume={41},
  number={4},
  pages={2456--2479},
  year={2021},
  publisher={Wiley Online Library}
}
```

## For the public

Summaries of this package in a plain language will be available soon. If you'd like a high-level overview of its components, please visit us again at a later time. 


## For researchers

We are committed to making our work findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable ([FAIR principles](https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata201618)) by the scientific community and the society at large.
The programming language/platform (i.e., [R](https://www.r-project.org/)) and data used here are publicly available via the the public preservation repositories without any charges.
All code is posted on this repository.

The following sections outline the steps you can take to run the WGEN.

#### Repository organization

- `README.md` is what you are looking at now.
- `LICENSE` describes the terms of the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE under which our code is licensed. This is a "free, copyleft license for software and other kinds of works, that guarantee end users the four freedoms to run, study, share, and modify the software".
- `docs/` contains the articles (PDf format) published in the peer-reviewed journals.
- `Programs/` implements our workflow XX
- `Data/` contains only raw inputs, stored in `data/raw`. If you reproduce our codes XX
- `Figures/` contains final versions of all our figures in image (`.png`) format. All are generated by our source code. _If you want to use these figures, you are responsible for complying with the policies of the journals our papers have been published, or going to be published, but we mainly ask that you cite our papers when you do so._


#### To browse the codes

> If you want to browse our code, this section is for you.

You will find four Jupyter notebooks in `scripts/`.
You can open them and they will render in GitHub.
This will show you how we produced all figures in our paper, along with some additional commentary.

If you want to dig deeper, but not to run our codes, then you may want to look at the Python scripts in `scripts/` and/or the module in `codebase/`.

#### To run WGEN

> If you want to reproduce or modify our results, this section is for you

Please note: **running this will require approximately 60GB of disk space**.
*All commands here assume standard UNIX terminal; Windows may be subtly different*.

First, `git clone` the repository to your machine.

Next, you will need to install conda (we recommend miniconda) and `wget`.

Next, you need to create th conda environment:

```shell
conda env create --file environment.yml
```

*If this gives you any trouble, you can use the exact version of packages that we did (this worked on an Apple M1 Macbook emulating OSX-64 but your mileage may vary on other systems):*

```shell
conda create --name txtreme --file conda.txt
```

Once you have created the environment, then activate it:

```shell
conda activate txtreme
```

You will also need to install our custom module in `codebase`

```shell
pip install -e .
```

In order to run, you will need to do two things to access required data.

1. Download the GPWV4 data. See instructions in [`data/raw/gpwv4/README.md`](data/raw/gpwv4/README.md).
1. Register for [a CDSAPI key](https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/api-how-to) with the ECMWF. This key is **required** for you to access this data. If you do not properly install the CDSAPI key, you will not be able to download the ERA-5 reanalysis data.

Now you can run!

```shell
snakemake --n <some number>
```

where `<some number>` specifies the number of cores to use (if you have no idea what this means, try 3: `snakemake --n 3`.
We again remind you that running will use nearly 60GB of disk space; a fast internet connection will be helpful.

### Issues and comments

- If you have issues related to the software/packages, please raise an issue in the Issues tab.
- If you have comments, please contact the correspondence of this repository [Nasser Najibi](https://nassernajibi.com) directly.
